My aim is to stay alive.
I don't want to die.
What is worth dying for?
Is diving into a cave
worth dying for?
The time comes for everyone.
I do everything I can
not to die down there.
MONAMI AGENCY PRESENTS
IN ASSOCIATION
WITH FUGLENE
A JUAN REINA FILM
DIVING INTO THE UNKNOWN
People often ask:
"What makes you go down there,
into places hostile
to human beings."
Modern technology gives us
the chance to explore
every place on Earth and
on the bottom of the sea
without going there yourself.
The only place left that
technology cannot reach are caves.
Both dry and underwater caves.
For me caves are very visual places.
I enjoy that.
The silence makes
a strong impression.
You are looking around
in total silence.
The further you dive,
you find new places
that may be familiar,
or in some special cases
you get to dive in places
no one has ever been before.
It's a fantastic feeling
when no one knows
what is behind the corner.
That is the true
feeling of exploration.
The dives we do are
potentially life-threatening.
There is always danger
but you don't dive with
just anyone.
You have to trust
your fellow divers 100%.
You can never underestimate
the importance of your
diving partner or team.
We kind of have
our own brotherhood
on the dives we do.
You are there with the friends
you trust most.
Our diving team is formed
around the Ojamo mine.
I have met a lot of
new people there.
We do a lot of traveling together.
They are the ones I like to
travel and dive with most.
I have made a lot of good
friends diving.
It's such a great feeling
to travel with them
and to spend vacations together.
It has to be fun.
If it's not fun
there's no point in doing it.
It's amazing to see places
no one else has seen before.
And to do that with
people who are so dedicated.
It's a very hands on
type of group.
We went to Norway intending
to film the deep part
of the route,
because no one has filmed
the entire route before.
We were planning to dive
from Plura to Steinugleflåget,
leave the gear there overnight
and dive back the next day.
Should I bring the rebreather
and everything else here?
Team one was Jari Huotarinen
and Patte.
Their job was to make a hole
in the ice on the Plura side.
Team two was me, Kaitsu
and Jari Uusimäki.
Our job was to climb up
inside Steinugleflåget
and take our second set
of equipment there.
Start the chainsaw,
Hamster.
The mood was laid back,
everyone was laughing.
We were in a good mood
when we set out.
It's a bit slippery here.
I think everything went well.
Jari and I made the hole
and were ready to go
when team two told us the path
and equipment were ready
and the hole was open,
so you could also get out.
So, we started to get going.
What do you think?
Should we wait or should we just go?
I agree.
Famous cave diver "the Hamster".
The hole.
Goddamn, it's clear in there!
Do you have two oxygen tanks?
And two argons?
- Yeah.
Okay.
Are they for the trip back home?
Well, for the trip back...
- Or if there is a problem.
Not for today or tomorrow, but...
Then we have one extra oxygen.
- Yes, we do.
When team one entered the water,
we started preparing
and we left about
two hours after them.
The dive between Plura and Steine
was really challenging
but I have done
way more demanding dives
with all of the guys we were
diving with that day.
This shouldn't have been
an overly challenging dive.
Looking back, perhaps we could have
done some things differently.
But the accident happened in
a very short period of time.
In that brief moment,
I did everything I possibly could.
But the conditions were not easy.
The beginning of the dive
had gone well for team one.
When they passed
the deepest part,
they reached a narrow tunnel
at a depth of 110 metres.
Patte went through it first,
with Jari behind him.
His equipment got stuck
in the tunnel.
This created a cascade of problems
which he didn't survive,
although Patte tried to help.
We passed the deepest part,
and the cave started inclining
I went through it.
I saw Jari flashing his light at me.
He was signaling for me
to come over.
I noticed that he was
caught up in the line.
I saw that he was
getting nervous,
which always happens
if you get stuck so deep.
I kept telling him to calm down.
He gave me a tank, which I
started carrying back and forth.
At some point,
he had nothing in his mouth.
He was changing the regulator...
the mouthpiece.
Then I saw him
taking in some water.
I tried to push the regulator
into his mouth
but of course it didn't work.
Gradually he stopped moving.
Jari was gone.
I stayed there for a while,
trying to get him out.
I soon realized
it wasn't going to work.
I was also breathing too fast.
I had to calm down and think.
The first thing I thought was that
when the next team arrives
this passage will be blocked and...
I just remember thinking
they will all be trapped.
I hardly remember the accident.
I don't have a coherent
memory of the event.
I remember certain images
of what happened.
Suddenly I saw Uusimäki
in front of me.
He was clearly having
some trouble.
He tried calling out to me.
I figured that
something was wrong.
Everything happened
in a few minutes.
After that,
I saw that Uusimäki was...
...dead.
I was in a hurry to
decide what to do.
I swam past Uusimäki.
Then I realized
more people were dead.
I mean Jari Huotarinen.
Next to Huotarinen was
Vesa Rantanen
who tried to get through
the narrowing
where Huotarinen
had gotten stuck.
Then I decided to go back
the way I had come
because I wasn't sure that
Vesa would make it through.
I also didn't know what lay
beyond the obstruction.
Would Patrik be there
blocking the way too?
Or will the path be clear?
130 metres down,
I could hear
Huotarinen's equipment beeping.
Then I saw that Jari had died
in the narrowing.
My next thought was
to keep moving forward.
I need to figure out
how to move past Jari.
I knew if I turned around,
the dive back would be too much.
A dive Kaitsu eventually did -
a more than ten-hour dive.
I really don't even know
how I managed to keep
myself together.
My family was probably
the biggest reason why...
...I wanted to get out.
Two Finnish men have died in
a diving accident in northern Norway.
Three of their friends
were also injured.
The accident happened
in an underwater cave
near the town of Mo i Rana.
This small mountain pool is where the
Finnish men began their tragic dive.
The police say that the victims
are 130 metres deep,
and that foreign help
is needed in their search.
Now, all movement and diving
in the area is prohibited.
Although it is sad
on so many levels
that they are not here
with us anymore,
there is no use thinking about
their earthly bodies.
It's better to remember all the
great times we've had together
and all the trips and dives
we've had together.
I don't believe in a higher power,
but one place that they'll
always be is in our memories.
AN INTERNATIONAL TEAM TRIED
UNSUCCESSFULLY TO RETRIEVE THE BODIES
THE NORWEGIAN POLICE
CLOSED THE CAVE
We had to abort
the ongoing operation,
because we felt it was too risky.
After an assessment,
we decided to abort the operation.
For the time being, access
to the cave is prohibited.
This was the decision
of the chief of police.
You only found one victim.
Is the other one even deeper?
We couldn't even access
that part of the cave,
because the passage
is blocked by the first victim.
So, it's impossible to get past.
Every single dive that we do
to those depths in a cave is a risk.
And the more dives we do,
the more risk there is.
This really is just too dangerous.
It's not worth to risk your own lives
to complete this task.
The operation has been called off.
We cannot just leave them there.
I don't know how their families
and friends would take it.
I guess it's a kind of
a grave, but...
I don't even want to
think about it.
I've barely slept because
I'm constantly
thinking about what happened
and planning how to bring
our friends home.
We feel like it's our job
to bring the boys home.
We have the right team, equipment
and the skills to do it.
It would be a great injustice
if we didn't go to Plura
to get this done.
This operation is illegal,
so the problem is that
we have to take more risks,
because we are working in secret.
But we have no other option.
We cannot leave those
guys in that cave.
On the first dive we won't
start carrying anyone.
If he gets stuck and we have to
go back the way we came
it's going to be
a very long dive.
And the guy who is behind
won't enjoy that at all.
The dive would be
too hard to handle.
If everything goes well,
we'll be done in three dives.
There are 16 people
in this operation.
We have Kaitsu, Patte and me.
Our job is to dive the deepest,
to the victims.
We'll release them and
bring them up to shallower water.
But we cannot do this without
safety divers and assistant divers.
They will make sure that
we get out safely,
and they act as a link
between us and the surface.
I am the surface manager.
I handle the operation
on the surface.
The others do the diving.
My spinal cord was damaged
in the accident
from decompression sickness,
so I can't dive myself.
But I am going there to help
the other divers.
I took a couple of body bags
from storage.
If no one else wants to,
I'll bag them.
Aren't we going to
leave them in the water?
I thought we would bring
them to the surface.
I just thought, if there are
animals in the cave...
That won't be a problem.
- They can't get into the bag.
Would it be better
if they were left in the water
and if they stayed face down?
It might take a day or two
before we get them out.
The bag is airtight.
It has a zipper.
Did you find out anything
about the stiffness of the bodies?
Basically it starts
within the first 6 hours
and during the next 6 hours
it's well under way.
Then it's on for
the next 12 hours,
and during the third 12 hours,
it starts going away.
That is normally what happens,
but when it's colder
that process slows down.
It's completely different
in cold water.
What about rotting?
It takes months.
Or maybe a month?
I was just thinking how soft...
They have been
inside their suits.
So it's not as bad as if
they'd been in the water.
What else?
- Communications, mostly.
We have to be mentally prepared
for getting caught.
That's when the
media circus would start.
If someone asks something,
obviously we won't tell them
what we are doing, we are just diving.
Or we act as dumb as possible,
which should be easy.
One risk factor is that
we are emotionally involved.
We all know the victims.
But that cave, those conditions,
that particular place...
No one else has ever been there
or managed to dive there
except the group
that is going there.
I wonder if
Laura is coming or not?
You can call and ask her.
On the other hand, she might
go to the wreck seminar.
Okay. It was the 27th.
From Friday to Monday.
So, four days on location.
It's a six-day trip if the travel time
takes a day each way.
The thing that you
cannot really prepare for,
especially with Kaitsu,
Patte and Sami,
is how things will look
when they get down there.
And how that will
affect you mentally.
So you can keep
yourself together.
But I have faith that they will.
The accident was already
so hard for them,
and they made it to the surface.
I don't think this is
an impossible task.
Bad things that could happen...
The suit tearing
would be really bad.
You would have to return to the
surface, or you would die.
Could I have a napkin?
- Yes.
Thank you.
If your respiratory rate goes up,
that is really bad too.
More carbon dioxide is generated
in deep water
and you wouldn't be
able to function anymore.
From the outside
this might seem foolishly risky.
But life in general
can be risky.
You cannot prepare for everything
that could go wrong.
You just cannot practice facing
a dead friend at 110 metres.
PLURDALEN, NORWAY
The Plurdalen valley is located
near the town of Mo i Rana.
There are lofty mountains
on both sides.
PLURA ENTRANCE
A few hundred metres off
is the mouth of the Plura cave,
and a kilometer further
is the entrance
of the Steinugleflåget dry cave.
Which is a massive cave-in.
STEINUGLEFLÅGET DRY CAVE
It's 300 metres from the mouth
of the cave to the surface.
And the height difference
is 100 metres.
It's quite a job to get
to the surface from
the mouth of the cave.
You have to carry the tanks 30
or 40 metres down, because
it's too steep.
Tommi! Stay there.
Wait a moment.
Let me give you this, Jani.
We'll get them, damn it.
Here is the first one.
Is there still
a lot of stuff up there?
A couple of tanks and a scooter.
Okay.
Are we done?
Yes. Nice.
- Is there still something up there?
...18, 19, 20.
There should be 24.
There are three or four up there.
We will get them tomorrow.
There are a few things
that will define what we do
over the next few days.
What do we want to
bring up from there?
Do we just want the guys up,
or do we want the guys
and their gear?
If we want to bring
more of the gear up,
it'll take an extra day or two
and some of us will be
leaving before then.
If we go there tomorrow,
we can get Jari
and probably his scooter.
Depending on who is diving,
we might even
get some rebreathers.
Kaitsu, do you remember
if Jari closed the loop?
I don't remember...
I mean, I didn't see it.
If the loop was closed
and the machine is dry,
it could be worth some money
for the heirs.
But again, we have to
remember the risks.
Maybe we shouldn't take the risk.
We can't sell a dead man's gear.
If it's upside down,
it may be flooded.
The only thing is really
Uusimäki's scooter.
If his wife gets it back,
and we could find a buyer for it.
They would get
some money from it.
It's easy to get that,
it weighs nothing.
So, should we get Jari
and both scooters?
Yes.
- We can get all of that tomorrow.
Okay.
- Good night.
Good morning. How are you?
- Very good.
Is someone going to Mo today?
Sorry?
- Is someone going to Mo i Rana today?
I don't know, maybe.
- You need gas.
If someone goes to Mo i Rana,
it's in the evening.
Can we drive with
just your scooter?
Yes, we can do that.
It's soaked.
There is a little left,
but we'll drive until it's empty.
How big should it be?
Bang on it a bit.
Like this?
Jari Huotarinen and I
were good friends.
I have thought
about how I'll react
when I meet my friends
at the bottom of the cave.
When you have to look them
in the eye again.
But somehow you can
psych yourself up
and think about
those things later.
Diving is a very
psychological sport.
It multiplies all your feelings,
your fears
and having nerves of steel
makes up for a lot.
The actual ice is underneath.
It wasn't so thick, after all.
When you have been through
such a traumatic experience,
all the talk and everything
about the subject
makes you really emotional.
I never want to experience
anything like that again.
We absolutely can't have
any more accidents.
The rescuer becoming the victim
would be the worst case scenario.
Can you hear me, Laura?
- I hear you.
A hundred minutes from now.
Team two can leave
in 100 minutes?
That's right,
but hold on for a moment.
We are making sure
that everything is ok.
Okay, let me know when.
See you on the other side.
PLURA ENTRANCE
STEINUGLEFLÅGET DRY CAVE
This goes from down here.
There was a rock slide.
So the visibility
may be zero at first.
What time is it?
- 3:47 pm.
Okay.
Don't go too fast.
I can't keep up with this scooter.
I'll put it in second gear.
- That's good.
All right.
(Patrik:) Is that the scooter's rope?
(Sami:) Yeah.
(Patrik:) There was nothing left.
(Kai:) Sorry?
(Patrik:) No tanks left.
(Kai:) I told you that Sami
will bring four!
(Kai:) Sami will bring them.
It takes extraordinary
peace of mind
to slow your breathing down,
to calm yourself down.
When you start breathing poorly,
it generates more carbon dioxide.
You become less and less alert.
When the situation goes far enough,
the diver becomes a passenger,
and your diving partner is forced
to see the whole thing through.
There's nothing you can do.
It's Jani.
Hi!
Jani...
Oh, shit.
It really hurts.
Ok, then.
Fuck.
- Did it start at the end or earlier?
I felt it a bit at six metres,
but now it really started
when we came back up.
It felt like my hand was
being hacked off with a blunt axe.
This started out well...
- Not a strong start.
Just take it easy and
breathe in some oxygen.
I'll arrange a ride
and more oxygen,
and we'll see if we have to
take you somewhere else.
Laura had signs
of decompression sickness.
For a moment I thought
we are totally fucked.
I was thinking about
how this would turn out.
I started thinking,
"What the fuck are we going to do?"
Can she even sit in the car
if we have to get her
out of here?
If she had needed a chopper it
would've jeopardized the operation.
This is not good.
(Kai:) Where are you?
(Kai:) What the fuck
are you doing there!
No one should dive down there
if it doesn't feel right.
You don't only put
yourself at risk, but others too.
Recurring accidents have
made me question
whether I even enjoy this sport.
I really want to dive, but I have
become increasingly concerned
about the friends I dive with.
I just never want to
go through that again.
I have slept so badly that
I felt I wasn't in the
right state of mind to dive.
SAMI AND PATRIK CONTINUE
DIVING WITHOUT KAI
(Sami:) Let's continue.
(Sami:) There is the first one.
(Sami:) And there is the second Jari.
(Sami:) Shall we start cutting?
(Sami:) Cut that.
(Patrik:) Sorry?
(Sami:) Cut off that rubber cord.
(Sami:) Easy, easy.
(Patrik:) Take the towing rope.
(Sami:) Okay.
(Sami:) Guide it a bit.
(Patrik:)
Wait, I am going to pass you.
(Patrik:) It's pretty tight.
(Sami:) Sorry?
(Patrik:) It's tight.
(Patrik:) Did you get it?
(Sami:) No.
(Patrik:) Shall we take a break?
(Sami:) Yes, let's do that.
(Patrik:) Shall we go?
(Sami:) Yeah.
(Sami:) Lift him up.
(Sami:) Jani, over here!
(Janne:)
How far away is Uusimäki?
(Sami:) Only about 20 metres.
(Janne:) Is he attached in any way?
(Sami:) No.
(Janne:) So we can get him tomorrow?
(Sami:) Yes, yes.
(Janne:) Okay.
(Janne:)
I'm going back to the surface.
(Sami:) Go ahead.
We'll be okay.
(Patrik:) Don't take him
up to the surface.
(Jani:) No, we won't.
AFTER A 6 HOUR DIVE
Way to go, Patte!
- All right!
There is more light in here
than last time.
It was pretty dark then.
Can you walk all the way up?
- Yeah, yeah.
Uusimäki was upside down,
with all the tanks strapped on.
And Jari was there on his knees,
where I left him.
Just like I remembered.
This trip was a success.
I have been waiting for this
for a couple of months.
I haven't been able to
think of anything else
than getting this dive done.
And now it is.
We are almost there now.
Do you think this night
will go a little bit better?
Were you restless?
I've been thinking about this
every single night
since I walked out of here.
- Yeah.
About when we would be able to
come back and get them out.
We are well on the way now.
- We made it here.
So...
Tomorrow we'll go there
from here,
take the second Jari with us
and come back up.
Last time I didn't know
whether to come back up
or stay down there.
I'm ready to go,
but I'll wait for Sami.
If you're waiting,
should we all go together?
Sami and I were talking
during decompression.
He asked if Kaitsu
is diving tomorrow.
My guess is that Kaitsu will
never dive with us again.
I saw it in his eyes
this morning.
Normally he never speaks,
but this morning he said
that he really
doesn't want to dive.
It's good that he said it.
- Yes, sure.
If he had started
falling apart down there...
We all would've been screwed.
I could take a day off on Wednesday
because I'm so old.
That's the first time you've said it.
Usually it's me.
But you were serious.
I'm just joking.
You must really be old if you're realizing it yourself.
- I'm not old.
See, you really have a problem with it.
- Yes, I do.
Once you hit 40, it's all downhill.
I never thought I'd live to 30.
And look what happened.
That was a pretty
long dive, too.
Is there anything warm to drink?
- Yes.
Cup of noodles?
Yes, noodles are good.
This was a fucking good day.
- Yeah.
I was really careful going through
all the tight spots.
We should always do
extra dives.
Not like what we usually do -
going straight to the end.
Like the last time
we came here.
If we had done a practice run then,
things would've been different.
It was totally our own fault.
Now that we know the deal,
the next dive should be quick.
Way to go, guys!
- We can call it a day.
You bet.
We felt so great after the
successful dive on Monday.
In many ways it went
better than we expected.
Even though you try to avoid
being lulled into thinking
the next dive will be easy,
that's kind of what happened.
You should never expect
that a dive will go well.
Because then it never does.
I guess the traumatic memories
will fade with time.
Or you learn to live with them.
If something happens to me,
what would happen to my family?
Those all might be reasons
to possibly stop diving.
I guess we are ready to go.
I am not too excited.
- Yeah, I bet.
I'll stay on the surface.
- Yes I heard.
Nothing wrong with that.
You shouldn't go if
you feel down about it.
So we have about 90 minutes?
Should we take the stuff
down there?
So that everything is ready.
I'll check what we need to
check for Uusimäki.
Mainly where he was
breathing from, the pressures.
I'll leave the scooter
on the other side?
And then...
- We'll come with our scooter.
You can probably start to swim
when you reach the slope.
I can check if the narrow spot
is good, it's not far from Jari.
No, only about 20 metres.
I can stay there to pull him.
Any way you like.
We'll get him easily.
You'll come with the scooter
and I'll film.
Then we'll start cutting.
Should we cut... these?
Cut all the straps
so it drops off.
The shoulder straps, belly strap...
That should come off
just by pulling.
Yesterday we were on
full throttle or in third gear.
If he seems not to be moving,
try slowing down and then revving it.
You'll hear a call from behind.
- Yell "stop"...
Or "full steam, go!"
"Go" is probably clearer.
- Go or stop.
Oh, fuck! -"Kuusamo,
taas kutsuu mua Kuusamo..."
Ok, off I go.
- Do well.
Bye!
(Sami:) Was it there?
(Patrik:) Was it this one?
(Patrik:) Well... Yes, over there.
(Sami:) Yeah.
(Sami:) OK.
(Sami:) It's tight.
(Patrik:) Fuck!
(Sami:) Wait, wait!
(Sami:) The cave is collapsing!
(Sami:) OK, go!
(Sami:) Pull, pull!
(Sami:)
Pull, pull. Go, go!
(Patrik:) Fucking hell!
(Sami:) Pull, pull.
Kaitsu?
- Yes.
What time is it?
- It's ten minutes to.
Should we go now?
- In a couple of minutes.
There is no rush,
whenever you are ready.
Janne, do you have everything?
- Yeah.
(Patrik:) Goddamn, that was heavy.
(Sami:) Yeah, it was.
(Patrik:) He was so fucking positive
that I cut the suit,
but it didn't help.
(Patrik:) I told Jani to attach
the tanks to the cord
so that it would
pull him down.
(Patrik:) But he was in a hurry to
leave and he didn't hear me.
(Veli:) Pull, pull!
Wait!
(Janne:)
That will add some weight to you.
(Janne:) Let's put one of those
heavy tanks on the waist rope.
Here, at the end of the rope.
(Veli:) Hey, stop!
Hey, hey!
He is drifting away!
(Veli:) Come down quickly!
(Mika:) Sorry?
(Veli:) Come down!
Grab that rope!
AFTER A 5 HOUR DIVE
Did they get him up?
Is the rope here?
- Did they get him up?
Yes, he's under the brim.
- So, both are up?
Yes.
He's 30 kg more positive
than Huotarinen.
I almost fainted a few times.
- We had to take a few breaks.
Fasten it under your arm
and secure it there.
Let's put it there
so that he's nearby.
Yes, let's put Uusimäki there.
Try to hold it tight.
So the knot won't slip off.
Vesa.
Way to go, guys!
I gave it all I had.
All in?
- Yes.
I am totally exhausted.
What an easy little job.
- Yeah.
It feels like I am
totally out of shape.
Let me dismantle it.
- You can unzip this.
Has Kaitsu already
carried all the gear up?
Most of it is
at the foot of the hill.
I figured he has been
working his butt off.
No, he was outside.
- Is he totally worn out?
He's probably okay now.
It has been tough for him.
- Yes.
I was thinking during
the break that
if there was a problem and
I took the wrong regulator
that would have been it.
I couldn't continue.
- Where did it happen?
At 00 metres.
I just held on to the rock
and breathe as deeply as possible.
I need to get my lungs fixed
and start rehab.
Detox, not rehabilitation?
Hello, hello.
Howdy!
Can you take my fin?
Where shall I put this device?
- All the way up, if you can.
Show the way, Vesa.
The surface manager will go ahead,
I can give you a push.
Don't.
- Okay, no more then?
"Don't touch me, God damn it!"
I'm not phobic, but
get your hands off my butt.
I might as well carry these
all the way up.
Patte, did you notice?
The cave collapsed.
Yes, I did.
You'll be able to see
in the footage
I was cutting the straps
and a rock fell on me.
I was like: "What was that?
Now the cave is collapsing!"
I tried to fling it off and
kept going. Eventually it did.
I guess we have to
start carrying the gear up.
I think that the gear down there
can stay as a memorial.
If someone goes there, or...
when it is
permitted to go there
it can be a reminder of what
a challenging place this is.
My appetite is much bigger
than when we first got here.
I'm not sure if it's all the
carrying or something else.
I guess it's something else.
Let's hope
it's easier to sleep, too.
Does Maria know?
Has anyone spoken to her today?
I promised to let Uusimäki's family
know that everything is okay.
It's tough to have to be taken
out of here by your friends,
but if no one else can...
It has been tough for us
to get our friends back.
On the other hand, this
is a good tribute to them.
If it was me,
it would be amazing to have
an escort on your final journey.
Your friends coming to
get you from down there.
Indeed.
Hello. Is this Bjørn Einar Bjørnå?
Yes.
- Hello and good morning.
This is Sami Paakkarinen calling.
I am calling from Plurdalen.
And I had the knowledge
that you were the
investigator in the diving accident,
which happened
last month in Plurdalen.
Yes, that's correct.
We have news for you that
we have recovered the bodies up.
Okay.
We have been running
a project for five days, and
the bodies are now up
in the Steinugleflåget dry cave.
Both of the bodies?
- Both of the bodies, yes.
Are you at the farm in Plurdalen?
Are you calling from there?
Yes, I am calling from
the farm in Plurdalen.
I understand.
We also took one
of the scooters of the victims,
one wrist computer
and one tank up with us.
So we have those for you
and then we have
a video of the recovery.
So we want to give them to you.
So you have taken both bodies up?
Yes, we have.
I will give a message to my chief
and then, one police
will contact you. Is that okay?
Yes, it is okay.
What, what, what...
Both?
Both? Yes, yes.
Shall we bag them?
- I don't have a strong opinion about it.
I thought we should leave
them in the water, but...
I am positive that
we should bag them.
But if Torsten is opposed to it
for some reason, then...
then we won't.
Then we won't do it.
I wish we knew how long
the officials will take.
That could help us decide.
We have packed
almost everything.
We'd like to hold a moment
of silence in the evening.
I'd like to put them in body bags.
- Is that what you have decided?
Yes, but I understand
that you think it's a bad idea.
Well, no.
You know best.
The bags are airtight
and can be closed
with a zipper.
I use them at work.
Do as you see best.
We would like to do that.
- Do that then.
It's agreed then.
At some point during
the evening then.
Thank you to everyone
who has helped us.
I hope we can return the favour.
Contact us
if you come to Finland.
We are never
going to visit you, Patrik!
Okay, see you
in the summer then!
I'll come to your Finnish sauna!
- That can be arranged.
It would have haunted me
for a long time
if we hadn't come back
to dive there again.
Everyone understands how important
it is for the families
to bring our friends back
home to be buried.
So there is a place
to bring flowers.
Thank you, everyone,
for taking part in this.
Now we can bring
both Jaris back home.
Many thanks on my behalf too.
This wouldn't have been
possible without you.
Time heals all wounds.
Maybe in this case too.
But, I don't see myself
as a hero in any way.
We just brought
our friends back home.
481 and 483 on the way,
with a strength of three.
We can begin.
Good Monday morning, everyone.
Before the extended meeting
of the Executive Board,
we have an accolade to hand out.
We can begin the rehearsal.
But not quite yet.
Fortunately,
we didn't drink yesterday.
Too much.
The retrieval of the victims was
an extremely challenging process.
Neither the Norwegian nor the British
divers could accomplish it.
It was also a demonstration of real
professional commitment,
and his respect for
brotherhood.
Sami, what would
your motto be?
I couldn't think of anything before,
so I guess I won't now either.
Can you come up
with a catchy one?
How about what you said
before the first deep dive?
"See you on the other side."
What is this?
- An olive.
Did you like it?
You didn't?
It's still in your mouth.
Just spit it into the napkin.
In recognition, the President
of Finland has awarded you
the First Class Medal
of the White Rose of Finland.
Congratulations.
- Thank you.
Action!
"If you can leave something
for tomorrow, do it tomorrow."
Thank you.
And Sami, your turn.
When?
Just a moment.
Look into the camera.
Action!
"Never leave anything
until tomorrow."
I'm not good at
giving speeches, but...
The way I see it,
we had no choice.
We had to get our friends back,
no matter what.
We took a little risk
and went to get them.
I could never have
done it alone.
I had a great team.
They should all get medals too.
But...
I guess it's up to someone else
to apply for them.
That's all.
POZO AZUL, SPAIN
If I can't dive anymore,
it will leave quite a void.
All of my friends
are involved in diving.
I don't want to think about it
before going into the water again,
to see if diving still feels good.
Or if I have some fears or issues
that are keeping me from diving.
I don't know if this accident
has changed me in any way.
Would it help my family if I quit
and found something else?
They know that I have to dive.
My wife asked the girls
if I was still allowed to dive.
They said: "He has to",
because he is so mad
when he can't."
I do want to dive.
It's what I'm good at.
It's what I enjoy doing.
That's the way I see it.
At times it's hard to justify
going somewhere to dive.
You have to explain a lot of things.
Like what we're doing and the risks.
It's annoying having to
explain it so much.
On the other hand,
I do owe them an explanation.
It would be tough to tell them
I'm returning to that place again.
That would be
unfair on my family.
Time will tell what I am
going to do with this.
I can see that someone else
has also zipped this.
There you go.
- Thank you.
If you have to ask
why I have to go there,
you probably wouldn't
understand the answer either.
It's hard to explain to someone
who doesn't know this sport
why we go to places that are
so hostile towards humans.
No matter how hard I try to
articulate or explain it,
you will never understand
why I have to go there.
Patte!
Be careful out there.
THE NORWEGIAN POLICE
DECIDED NOT TO PRESS CHARGES
AGAINST THE DIVERS
IN MEMORY OF JARI HUOTARINEN
AND JARI UUSIMÄKI